Culture on my island is very strong.
For example, the head of the family
can choose the family’s religion
and also who they will marry.
One day, many family members of a boy
that my father wanted me to marry
came to visit my father.
Their purpose was that they could request
that we would be married.
I respectfully explained that I could not do that.
So my father started beating me.
The first blow with the rod was very painful.
But Jehovah helped me by moving Mama to act
as if she would help him to beat me,
but instead, she didn’t actually beat me.
For six months, he imprisoned me in the house,
and he assigned me various hard jobs to do.
The thing that was the most difficult for me
was not being with the brothers and sisters
doing spiritual activities for Jehovah.
But what really strengthened me
was the gift of prayer.
I would pray constantly
and talk to Jehovah through prayer.
When I would do the meetings by myself,
I would make a schedule on Saturday night.
Then, on Sunday
when all my family went to church,
I would start by praying,
singing, reading the paragraphs,
raising my hand,
and I would answer the questions myself.
It was as if I was with my brothers
and sisters at the meeting.
Also, I would wait to see my younger cousins
every Sunday as they walked by
because I knew they would visit
my studies and return visits.
I just went to the kitchen to wait.
I waited for them and watched them go by,
looking forward to being able to see them,
even though they didn’t see me.
Only I saw them.
And when they passed by,
I saw that they went to preach
where the Bible students were.
I really felt strengthened, happy.
During those trials that I had to endure,
there were times
that I was very scared, frightened.
I really needed
the courage that Jehovah supplies.
That is why I begged Jehovah for courage,
and immediately Jehovah gave me courage
so that I didn’t have to be afraid anymore.
I had peace,
and I was able to endure those trials.
By helping me to endure that test,
Jehovah helped me to experience
the blessings that I’m having today.
Now, I am really happy!
In 2013, we decided to make a move
from the United States to the Marshall Islands.
We have a combined family
of 9 children and 24 grandchildren.
We had a middle income family,
and, you know,
you have everything at your disposal.
It was a big adjustment
to move where we knew
that we wouldn’t have those conveniences.
Life here is very different from the United States.
Many of the houses
don’t have kitchens or indoor bathrooms,
and even in the house that we rented,
there was no stove or refrigerator.
I was very apprehensive about making the move.
It’s a little bit harder
for older ones to learn a new language.
And so how
would I be able to conduct Bible studies?
How would I be able to,
as an elder, help out within the congregation?
I had one study who had a really fierce dog,
and I really didn’t want to go back to that house.
But I went back to have the Bible study,
and I didn’t see the dog.
So I asked her, “Where is the dog?”
And she said,
“My uncle ate him.”
At 2 Chronicles 15:7,
it says ‘do not be discouraged,
there exists a reward for your activity.’
And so we busied
and asserted ourselves in the work.
And so immediately we had,
like, ten Bible studies in two weeks.
But the benefit of that
is we would go over chapter one,
maybe ten times.
And so through repetition
and through due diligence,
it really facilitated us
learning the language and being able to use it
to study with people
and help them come to know Jehovah.
I am a bit afraid of water.
You know, we are on an island,
and here I’m surrounded by water,
and I cannot swim.
We had a campaign recently
to preach to the outer islands,
so I had to think about the people.
When I think about their desire to learn
more about God, their love for God,
their love and respect for the Bible,
it really motivates me
to keep going in spite of my fears.
And when you think
about going from door to door,
every person will stop
—stop what they’re doing—
to talk to you about God.
They’ll accept the literature;
they want Bible studies.
It’s really a pioneer’s dream.
Their desire,
their love for the truth
and wanting to know about Jehovah,
well, that’s an additional blessing
that is encouraging and strengthening us.
She says, “It’s a pioneer’s dream.”
I say, “It’s a pioneer’s paradise.”